---
layout: post
title:  "Suzy's story"
tags: []
published: false
---

Meet Suzy. She's the tech lead of a team. She wants to do the "right" thing, but wants to do it in a way that everyone gets on board with. This is often difficult, but Suzy is persistent. Suzy's goals come from a place akin to obsession, she wants to do everything she can to make things easier, and hates the miscommunications, arguments, and rampant waste she sees everywhere in her organization. Her main goal is to make it easier to write code, and to deliver things that are good for the customer as fast as possible. These things make her feel like she's doing a good job.

--------------------------

Meet Jamie and Bob. They are both leaders in the organization. Jamie is the "head of architecture", and Bob is the current "director of technology". Jamie has been jockying for Bob's position for some time now. As head of architecture, she makes a lot of decisions that have a significant impact on dozens of teams in the organization, but she wants the opportunity to make even BIGGER decisions. She wants to decide whether the company focuses on developing their hardware devices, or their software offerings. She wants to decide whether budget goes to marketing, or IT. She wants to decide whether the company spends money on an agile transition, or not. She wants to decide which direction the organization will move in. She wants to have the power to....decide things. Like Bob does.

This year, Bob decides it's best to focus on a video chat service and advertise mostly on social media given the environment and current market research. As soon as he speaks a few words, everything starts to change. Slowly but surely there is a reorganization, new people are hired and long time employees are fired, the marketing messages change and the entire development cycle shifts toward these new goals.

However, as it turns out, the system and processes that enable this change are so old and slow that in the end, pretty much nothing happens. Significant resources are spent on software projects which fail. Even the marketing team, which relies on engineering teams to produce, store, and distribute their content are left helpless to alter their direction, no matter how much they want to follow the direction of Bob. Bob is eventually removed from his position, as nothing special happened during his role there and the company lost even more money - his bosses decided, in their infinite wisdom, that they need to find a new leader who can really "shake things up."

--------------------------

In the meantime, Suzy carefully advances her relationships in the team, being careful not to burn any bridges. She studies the technologies that would be useful to her team, and fosters the growth of her team members. It seems only natural to spend time doing so considering, in time, these will be the future leaders of the organization if they are convinced to stay and ********.

She works with one small team of 8 people, and does the best that she can to push the team to try and make things better. Together, they collaborate to select some new initiatives and start to develop tools and processes that are very successful in making the team more efficient, but have little impact on the organization overall. This works well as the first reasonable small step for them to take.

Suzy has fostered strong relationships with other teams, and some of them who know her see the results of what's happening in her team. They start to ask if they can get documentation to copy some of their techniques. Suzy is more than happy to help, and gives as much as she can, expecting nothing in particular in return. More teams start to copy these new strategies, and they start to use the tools created by Suzy's team regularly. A large part of Suzy's team becomes maintaining these tools, in addition to their usual work. Eventually, she manages to fight tooth and nail to get a small portion of the team time to work as a "shared services" team to have the time to really focus on maintaining these tools properly, and Suzy works closely with them to ensure these services are shepherded in the best way possible.

Meanwhile, Jamie fights hard to take the gap created by Bob being moved to another department. She's always thought Bob went about things all wrong, and foolishly decided to focus on video chat and social media advertising. The real way forward, she knows with utter confidence, is to focus the tech sector more on user experience design and to advertise through more conventional methods like television and billboards. She sees a great future for the company if they would just listen to her, but they are doomed otherwise.

Jamie finally convinces enough people her ideas are the way forward, and someone gives her a chance in the new tech director role. They need to fill the position anyways, and there are no other good candidates who have the required relationships and experience within the company. In a way, she's the only reasonable choice.

Jamie, now tech director, decides it's best to focus on user experience design and advertise through television and billboard ads, given the environment and current market research. As soon as she speaks, everything changes. There is a reorganization, new people are hired and long time employees are fired, the marketing messages change and the entire development cycle shifts toward these goals.

Meanwhile, Suzy doesn't mind so much. Her goal is to fix the big process problems in the organization, and make things more efficient, regardless of the top level decisions. She continues working with the shared services team and decides to move forward with an experiment she's read about, a new tool that helps to distribute services as a self-service platform to other teams. She tests it out, and after a few weeks it doesn't seem to work. She gets some flak for this failure, but she's already working on a new idea - dropping the tool and managing the self-service platform with more custom strategies. Everyone trusts Suzy - they somehow sense she wants to fix things more than she wants to achieve recognition for herself. This being the case, not only do they allow her to try again, but they even support her once more after her recent failure.

This time, success is obvious after only a month. Many consumers start leveraging these platform services, she carefully tracks metrics to see that people are developing things more often and getting changes faster to customers. She works with the platform team to develop an A/B testing system based on some blog posts she read last month, trying a few more strategies until she discovers one that works. Her platform makes it so easy to consume the metrics from the tests, and to make changes based on that feedback, that it would be idiotic for any other teams not to take advantage. So, more teams start to come on board and the platform becomes a core part of the entire organizations IT strategy. Given the success, Suzy starts to make some requests to expand the platform team so she can keep up with the many requests that are coming in.

Jamie hears about this "platform" stuff a couple of times. She's mildly interested and tells people it's a good thing, and how things like that would never have happened under Bob's rule. When asked for an increase in the budget to expand the platform services more quickly, she explains that unfortunately they are in the midst of a new marketing campaign which will make or break the new UX launch, and can't spare the money. They can worry about the tech stuff later, there's no point in building something if they aren't able to market it to customers yet.

Suzy, of course, is annoyed when she finds out that the platform can't grow faster with a bigger budget, but she does her best with what she has, and doesn't make a fuss about it. She continues to do the best job that she can and when asked to be promoted within the organization, she turns them down, suggesting it would take her too far away from all the work she's driven up until that point. She doesn't want to lose the opportunity to write code and stay familiar with the relationships she's made in her sector. Everyone understands, and they give her even more leeway after hearing she decided in this way - some people even flex their own budgets behind their superior's backs to help with Suzy's platform efforts, knowing that it will benefit their teams later on.

Jamie's UX changes and marketing campaigns cost a lot of money, but don't do particularly well. People are confused by the new UX changes, and they are delivered much later, and at much lower quality than originally promised. After a few months, Jamie sees the writing on the wall and takes another job before the disaster becomes any more obvious, leaving the organization with the tech director gap once again and with no effective handover to whoever will follow.

Alfred jumps into action. He's always thought Jamie was going the wrong direction, and that if they invested instead in virtual reality and focused specifically on tik-tok video advertising, that the company could really prove they are behind new age technology and penetrate a totally new market. He fights hard for the tech director position and eventually convinces the right people that this is the way forward.

They need to fill the position anyways, and there are no other good candidates who have the required relationships and experience within the company. In a way, he's the only reasonable choice.

Suzy's platform is now really gaining traction. Because of the great success, she's started to build a new culture in the organization. Before they were siloed and argumentative - but the platform has shown them if they collaborate they can benefit both themselves AND other parts of the organization at the same time. The culture of a zero-sum game starts to dissipate, and a culture of partnership and alliance starts to be forged. All of this comes from the obvious benefits shown originally by a single team, which spread to 2, then to 10, and eventually become a culture that if not followed, other teams would be the laggards. It practically forced the organization into a state of culture change, altering the way leaders think instead of firing them and hiring others with "better skills".

In the meantime, Alfred is now tech director, and decides it's best to focus on VR and advertise mostly through tik-tok given the environment and current market research. As soon as he speaks, everything changes. There is a reorganization, new people are hired and long time employees are fired, the marketing messages change and the entire development cycle shifts toward these goals.

These changes disrupt Suzy's world slightly, but most of it has little to no effect, and she continues on without much change. Great things are happening within the organization due to the cultural shift that was made.

Alfred starts to develop the VR offerings, and though out of the three ideas of the last 3 tech directors (including Alfred) this one is by far the most complex and difficult to implement, Suzy's cultural changes have reached the knee of the curve and are becoming very obvious. Alfred finds that when he requests things to be done, they quickly get finished and deployed - communication is strong, and the shared services are used by any new teams that spin up. Sometimes new teams are spun up just to test ideas, because it is so easy to create them. If they fail, no one feels bad about it, because a culture of failing fast and learning from mistakes has been developed within the organization. Things are much different than when Jamie and Bob tried to develop their companies services.

After only 7 months, incredibly the teams manage to release the first VR offering and start testing it with customers. Alfred thinks it's a bad idea and prefers to wait until they have a more "fully complete" product, but the cultural change in the organization is so significant at this point that his middle managers manage to convince him of the value of releasing small changes first to test with the customers. Eventually Alfred agrees, though he knows in the back of his mind it's going to cause problems, and exactly who to blame when it goes wrong.

To his delight and surprise, customers enjoy the new offerings. Even more so, they are blown away at how they can give direct feedback about the product and see those changes developed into the offering in mere weeks. They start to tell their friends about this new company that makes this amazing VR app. Some people see it on tik-tok, I'm sure....but that doesn't really matter much, does it?

Alfred rakes in the money - and the respect. It's clear that his powerful decision-making prowess is what brought the company to this high point. They are well known around the industry and even cross industry within the VR sector for some of the amazing innovations the teams have...er....I mean, Alfred has made!

 Suzy and others on the ground can clearly see that the cultural shifts, platform offerings, continuous delivery, and more that she has driven have had an incredible impact. But she also knows that it wasn't just her, it was a series of teams around her that were amazing enough to actively listen and react to the thoughts and advice of others. For this reason, she never feels comfortable taking any credit for the changes, knowing they would have been impossible without all the other actors that were involved. Though she turned it down before, she feels she might be ready to be promoted now that she has seen all the success, thinking she could make even bigger beneficial impact with more control over the budgets, but she's never asked again. She's never really even noticed again.

However, clever as ever, she takes advantage of the newfound money within the organization by asking for a larger budget for the platform. She believes they are in a mature enough state to start continuously deploying, and restructure a few big architectural shifts that will cost a lot of money in the next few months but would save incredibly on maintenance costs over the next 2 years.

Alfred is asked about this request at a meeting, but he has a lot of other things on his plate with the new tik-tok advertising campaign being developed, and a possible big decision to move into AR. He doesn't have time or budget to waste on this tech stuff at the moment. He quickly turns the request down and continues on with the other more important decisions he has to make that day. Alfred is soon promoted to CTO and starts to make a name for himself in the industry. He buys his 3rd house and starts to plan a move to another company as CEO for a large salary increase. His successful resume from the VR program makes him a shoo-in.

Suzy is slightly annoyed that she doesn't get the budget, but she does the best that she can within the constraints set before her. She continues to push for the changes she wanted and eventually convinces enough people to redirect their budgets and time to help her, knowing it will benefit them in the future. The AR releases are also a great success. Alfred gets a huge bonus from this.

A few people also thank Suzy for her help.